.. contents::

Common XML problems
-------------------

XML documents are used across libvirt to store structured data. This
document describes common problems with XML documents that are passed to
libvirt through the API. Mis-formatted XML documents, inappropriate
values, missing elements, etc may produce errors that this document
helps to identify and eliminate.

Editing domain definition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Although not recommended it's sometimes needed (or easier to perform a
task) to edit a domain XML file manually. Domain's XML can be edited
with the following command:

::

   # virsh edit dom

This command starts an editor with the current definition of the domain.
After you finish your edits and save the changes, the XML is reloaded
and parsed by libvirt. If the XML was correct, following message is
displayed:

::

   # virsh edit dom

   Domain dom XML configuration edited.

Please note, that when using the "edit" command in virsh after
incorrectly editing a XML, the changes are not saved. Consider saving
your changes before exiting the editor.

Once you have saved the XML it is possible to use the virt-xml-validate
command to check for usage problems:

::

   # virt-xml-validate config.xml

If there are no errors then your description is well-formed from an XML
point of view and matches the libvirt schema. The schema cannot catch
all constraints, but fixing any reported errors will get you further
along.

Passing XML documents to libvirt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Numerous API functions of libvirt (and their implementation in virsh)
take XML documents as their arguments. This documents are passed to the
XML parser, that detects syntax errors and then are processed internaly.
Most errors

XML documents stored by libvirt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These documents contain definitions of domains, their states and
configurations. All of those documents are automatically generated and
should not be edited manually. Errors in these documents contain the
file name of the broken document. The file name is valid only on the
host machine defined by the URI. (It may be the machine the command is
run on.)

Errors in files created by libvirt are very rare. One possible source of
these errors is a downgrade of libvirt; newer versions of libvirt will
always be able to read XML generated by older versions, but older
versions of libvirt may be confused by XML elements added in newer
libvirt.

XML Syntax errors
-----------------

Syntax errors are caught by the XML parser. The error message contains
useful information that can lead to identification of the problem.
Example error message from XML parsing:

::

     error: (domain_definition):6: StartTag: invalid element name
     <vcpu>2</vcpu><
   -----------------^

The error message consists of three lines. First line holds the error
message and the two following lines contain context of the XML file
containing the error and a pointer to ease identification of the error.

Information contained in this message:

(domain_definition)
   File name of the document that contains the error. File names in
   parentheses are symbolic names to describe XML documents parsed from
   memory (they don't directly correspond to files on disk). File names
   that are not contained in parentheses are local files that reside on
   the target of the connection.
6
   Line number that contains the error.
StartTag
   invalid element name
   Error message from the libxml2 parser.

Extra stray "<" in the document
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This snippet of a domain XML contains an extra "<" in the document:

::

   <domain type='kvm'>
     <name>domain</name><
     <memory>524288</memory>
     <vcpu>2</vcpu>
     ...

**Symptom**

Libvirt produces following message:

::

     error: (domain_definition):6: StartTag: invalid element name
     <vcpu>2</vcpu><
   -----------------^

This error message describes that the parser expects a new element name
after the '<' symbol on line 6 of a domain definition XML document that
was provided as a string.

**Solution**

Remove the extra "<" or finish the new element.

Unterminated attribute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This snippet of a domain XML contains a unterminated element attribute
value:

::

   <domain type='kvm>
     <name>domain</name>
     ...


**Symptom**

Libvirt produces following less obvious message:

::

   error: (domain_definition):2: Unescaped '<' not allowed in attributes values
     <name>domain</name>
   --^


**Solution**

Close all attribute value strings. (quotation marks and apostrophes)

Forgotten "/" in unpaired tag, unended tag
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following snippet contains an unended pair tag:

::

   <domain type='kvm'>
    ...
    <features>
      <acpi/>
      <pae/>
    ...
   </domain>

This is a example of a similar problem with a extra closing tag:

::

   <domain type='kvm'>
     </name>
     ...
   </domain>

Unpaired tags have to be ended with "/>". The following snippet contains
an example of a tag not following this rule:

::

   <domain type='kvm'>
     ...
     <clock offset='utc'>


**Symptom**

All of the errors above create the same error message:

::

   error: (domain_definition):61: Opening and ending tag mismatch: clock line 16 and domain
   </domain>
   ---------^

Identifying the root of the error is a little bit tricky. The error
message contains three hints to identify the offending tag. The message
after the last colon **clock line 16 and domain** states that the
offending tag is **<clock ...** on line 16 of the source documment. The
last hint is the tag provided in the context part of the message, that
identifies the second offending tag.


**Solution**

End tags properly.

Typos in tags
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following examples contain flawed XML tags by a whitespace or special
character typo

::

   <domain type 'kvm'>
     ...

::

   <dom ain type='kvm'>
     ...

::

   <dom#ain type='kvm'>
     ...


**Symptom**

All of the mistakes above produce the following error message:

::

   error: (domain_definition):1: Specification mandate value for attribute ty
   <domain ty pe='kvm'>
   -----------^


**Solution**

To identify the problematic tag, follow the guide provided by the
pointer and context of the file.


Logic and configuration errors
------------------------------

A well formatted XML can contain errors that are syntactically correct
although are not allowed in libvirt. There is a vast amount of these
errors. This document will try to identify and describe the most tricky
and common ones.

Vanishing parts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The symptom is that parts of the change you made have no effect and do
not show up once after editing or defining the domain, the define or
edit command works but if you dump the XML again the change you made
disappeared. A classical error when writing XML for libvirt from scratch
instead of getting it generated is to use a broken construct or making
an error in some of the syntax, like a misplaced or wrong tag or
attribute name. The problem is that libvirt will generally only look for
constructs that it knows and ignore everything else. So some of your
changes made to the XML may vanish after libvirt parsed your input. The
best way to check against such problems is to validate the XML input
before passing it to edit or define commands:

Validating XML against libvirt schemas
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Libvirt developers maintain a set of XML schemas bundled with libvirt
and defining as much as possible the constructs allowed in XML documents
used by libvirt. You can validate libvirt XML files using the following
command:

::

   # virt-xml-validate libvirt.xml

If that passes then chances are that libvirt will understand all
constructs from your XML, though that is not an absolute guarantee, for
example the schemas cannot detect options which are valid only for a
given hypervisor, but that should help pinpointing problems. Any XML
generated by libvirt for example as a result of a virsh dump command
should validate without error (and failure to do so should be reported
to the developers for fixing, thanks !)

Incorrect drive device type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add a new cdrom drive or modify a existing one with the following XML:

::

   <disk type='block' device='cdrom'>
     <driver name='qemu' type='raw'/>
     <source file='/path/to/image.iso'/>
     <target dev='hdc' bus='ide'/>
     <readonly/>
   </disk>


**Symptom**

Definition of the source image for the cd-rom virtual drive is not
present despite being added:

::

   # virsh dumpxml domain
   <domain type='kvm'>
     ...
     <disk type='block' device='cdrom'>
       <driver name='qemu' type='raw'/>
       <target dev='hdc' bus='ide'/>
       <readonly/>
     </disk>
     ...
   </domain>


**Solution**

A disk device of type *block* expects that the source is a physical
device. To use the disk with a image file use type *file* instead.
